[DPE-9311] Initial user documentation (#24)
canonical/valkey-operator: docs/how-to/tls/enable-tls.md

# How to enable TLS

Valkey provides a secure transport layer for communication between clients and Valkey,
and the charm provides a simple way of enabling TLS encryption.

## Deploy a TLS provider

This guide will use the [Self-signed Certificates](https://charmhub.io/self-signed-certificates)
charm as an example for all cases.

```{caution}

> **[Self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate) are not recommended for a production environment.**

Reviewer: Praise: It's great that you have this warning.

> Check [this guide](https://charmhub.io/topics/security-with-x-509-certificates) for an overview of all the TLS certificates charms available. 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's avoid using the word `this` in links if possible.

```suggestion
Check the [Security with X.509 certificates](https://charmhub.io/topics/security-with-x-509-certificates) page for an overview of all the TLS certificates charms available. 
```

Author: updated

```text
juju deploy self-signed-certificates
```

Wait until `self-signed-certificates` is `active` by monitoring it with `juju status`.

```text
App                       Version  Status  Scale  Charm                     Channel   Rev  Address         Exposed  Message
self-signed-certificates           active      1  self-signed-certificates  1/stable  586  10.152.183.111  no       
valkey                             active      2  valkey                    9/edge     11  10.152.183.123  no       
```

## Enable client-to-server encryption

To enable client-to-server encryption, you need to generate the required certificates
and keys for the clients.

### Integrate on `client-certificates` endpoint

Integrate the certificates charm with the Charmed Valkey application on the `client-certificates`
endpoint. This will generate the required certificates and keys in the TLS provider and 
send them to Charmed Valkey.

```shell
juju integrate valkey:client-certificates self-signed-certificates:certificates
```

### Check certificates in use

To check that the Valkey server is using the certificates generated by the 
`self-signed-certificates` charm, run the following command:

```text

> $ valkey-cli -h 10.1.44.126 -p 6379

Reviewer: Todo: Apply a consistent approach for the best practices – either Terminal blocks or separate code blocks for input and output without CLI prompts. Here and everywhere else.

Author: done

> Could not connect to Valkey at 10.1.44.126:6379: Connection refused

Reviewer: Suggestion: This approach of trying to connect each step seems more appropriate for a tutorial. Since it's a how-to guide, it is supposed to be more direct and have less explanation. I suggest dropping all checks until it's all set so the only test we do should succeed (if we did all the steps correctly).

Author: Was combined into a single TLS page.

not connected> 
```

You can see that the request failed because `valkey-cli` is trying to connect to the
database on the default port and without TLS. Let's try to connect using the correct port
and the TLS directive.

```text
$ valkey-cli -h 10.1.44.126 -p 6380 --tls
Could not connect to Valkey at 10.1.44.126:6380: SSL_connect failed: certificate verify failed
not connected>                                                 
```

The connection attempt failed because the server is using a certificate that the
client cannot verify. 

> In order to accept the server's certificate, the `valkey-cli` client needs to know the

Reviewer: Suggestion: Wording fixes.

```suggestion
To verify the server's certificate, the `valkey-cli` client needs to know the
```

Author: done

the client certificate and key to authenticate the client. 

For this guide, download the server's certificate and key from a unit of Charmed
Valkey to the local machine using these commands:

```text
$ juju scp --container valkey valkey/1:/var/lib/valkey/tls/client.pem client.pem
$ juju scp --container valkey valkey/1:/var/lib/valkey/tls/client.key client.key 
```

Now you can provide the client certificate and key through the `--cert` and `--key`
flags when using the `valkey-cli` command:

```text
$ valkey-cli -h 10.1.44.126 -p 6380 --tls --cert client.pem --key client.key --cacert ca_cert.pem
10.1.44.126:6380> ping
(error) NOAUTH Authentication required.
```

You can now successfully connect to the server using the `tls` directive and provide
the CA certificate, client certificate, and key to verify the server certificate. 

## Enable encryption at deployment time

You can also deploy the cluster with encryption enabled from the start by integrating
Charmed Valkey with the TLS certificates provider charm at deployment time.

```text
juju deploy self-signed-certificates
juju deploy valkey -n 3 --channel 9/edge --trust

> juju integrate self-signed-certificates:certificates valkey:client-certificates

Reviewer: Question: What's the difference to what we did before? Just the time between deploying valkey and integrating it with the certificates provider?

Author: Removed

```

## Certificate expiration and rotation

> Charmed Valkey provides full automation of certificate rotation. If a certificate

Reviewer: Suggestion: This phrase is a bit too descriptive for a how-to guide. Let's make it a bit more action-oriented (even if nothing needs to be done).

```suggestion
Certificate rotation is fully automated in Charmed Valkey.
No manual efort should be needed. If a certificate
```

Author: done
